# IDS
CSCI262 Assign 3

An event modeller & intrusion detection system in accordance with the system descriptions below. The implementation is in Java.

Initial Input You only need command line options at the setup phase, some user input is required later. IDS Events.txt Stats.txt Days

Events.txt and Stats.txt define the formats and the distributions of the events to be modelled. Days is an integer used in the next section. An Events.txt file. This file describes the events and some of their parameters. 5 Logins:D:0::3: Time online:C:0:1440:2: Emails sent:D:0::1: Emails opened:D:0::1: Emails deteled:D:0::2: The first line contains the number of events being monitored. Each subsequent line is of the form Event name:[CD]:minimum:maximum:weight: C and D represent continuous and discrete events respectively. Discrete events must take integer values and occur one at a time, continuous events don’t need to take an integer value and an occurrence of that event may be of any value. The minimum and maximum specify the allowed range for that event type across a day. Continuous events need to be recorded to two decimal places. The weights are used in the alert engine and will always be positive integers. The file Stats.txt contains the distributions to be modelled for the events. Stats.txt file. 5 Logins:4:1.5: Time online:150.5:25.00: Emails sent:10:3: Emails opened:12:4.5: Emails deteled:7:2.25: The first line again contains the number of events being monitored. Each subsequent line is of the form Event name:mean:standard deviation:

Activity Simulation Engine and the Logs Once the intial setup has taken place, and you have read in the base files, the activity engine should start generating and logging events. Your program should give some indication as to what is happening, without being verbose.

This produce statistics approximately consistent with the statistics specified in the file Stats.txt. It will log for the number of Days specified at the initial running of IDS. The process used to generate events approximately consistent with the particular distribution. This is likely to differ between discrete and continuous events.

Analysis Engine The program will indicate it has completed event generation and is going to begin analyis. It will measure that baseline data for the events and determine the statistics associated with the baseline. Produce totals for each event for each day, store that in a data file, and determine the mean and standard deviation associated with that event across that data.

Alert Engine The alert engine is used to check consistency between “live data” and the base line statistics. Once this phase is reached it should prompt the user for a file, containing new statistics, and a number of days. The new statistics file has the same format as Stats.txt from earlier but will generally have different parameters for the events. For each day generated it will report on whether the there is an intrusion detected by comparing an anomaly counter with a threshold. It will calcualte the anomaly counter by adding up the weighted number of standard deviations each specific tested event value is from the mean for that event, where the standard deviation and mean are those it have generated from the base data and reported, and the weight is taken from the original Events.txt file. For example, if the mean number of logins per day is 4 and the standard deviation is 1.5; then if we get 1 login in a day we are 2 standard deviations from the mean. Referrring back to the weight of the login event we see it was 2 so the login event contributes 4 to our overall anomaly counter. The threshold for detecting an intrusion is 2 (Sums of weights) where the weights are taken from Events.txt. If the anomaly counter is greater or equal to the threshold you should report this as an anomaly. It will output the threshold, and give the anomaly counter for each day as well as stating each day as okay or flagged as having an alert detected.

Once the alert engine part has finished it will return to the start of this phase, so another set of statistics and number of days can be considered. An option to quit will be provided.
